label orange1:

$ simplicity = False
$ danger = False
$ badspeech = False
$ goodspeech = False

"I punch in the coordinates for the orange planet."
"A warmer planet might be more promising for settlement..."
"It's a slim chance, but I'll have to take it."
"I engage the ship's engines and watch the stars turn to blurry lines out the window."
"Penelope always preferred the cold."
"She was a weird kid like that."
"I suppose she never got to do anything fun in the heat, so for her it was just uncomfortable."
"She never got to go to the beach on a hot summer's day, or take a nap in the warmth of the sun..."
"If she had, would she still prefer the cold?"
"Or is she sitting on that planet right now, feeling uncomfortable and grumpy that of all the planets in the galaxy, they had to pick the hot one?"
"I wouldn't have let them pick the hot one, I think as I recline the chair and slip my arms into the armrests."
"Even if we had to go it alone, I would have made sure we built our home somewhere she liked."
"The thought lingers with me as I drift into stasis."

scene bg black
with Dissolve(2.0)

p "Mom?"
p "Do you know who my father was?"
p "Can you tell me about him?"
if truth:
   if calypso1:
      t "Your father..."
      t "I don't know they'd want you to call them that."
      t "They told me to forget."
      t "I have to forget."
   else:
      t "Your father..."
      t "I don't know they'd want you to call them that."
      t "They told me to forget..."
      t "But I can't."
      t "I'm so sorry, Penelope. But I can't."

else:
   if calypso1:
      t "Your father..."
      t "Your father is dead."
      t "They told me to forget."
      t "I have to forget."
   else:
      t "Your father..."
      t "Your father is dead."
      t "They told me to forget..."
      t "But I can't."
      t "I'm so sorry, Penelope. But I can't."
p "Why do we have to forget?"
p "Why can't we remember things, mom?"
p "I forget the taste of coriander."
p "I forget what the flowers smelled like."
p "I forget what you looked like."
p "Why do I have to forget?"
p "Why did we never take a photo together?"
p "Mom..."
"I hold Penelope's face in my hands."
if truth:
   "To help her."
else:
   "To comfort her."
"But she has no face."
"She has no face because I have forgotten her face."
"I have forgotten her and she has forgotten me, and she slips from my hands and becomes the waters of Calypso, and they pour over me and fill my ship until everything is dark."

scene bg space
with Dissolve(2.0)

"I wake up to a red glow."
"Is it sunlight?"
"How long was I napping for? Is it sundown already?"
"I open my mouth to call to my grandma."
"Please tell me I didn't oversleep again..."
"But I didn't oversleep. The stasis pod always wakes me up ontime."
"No, the red glow is from the planet, hovering above me."
"It's almost entirely orange and red - deserts lined with oxidized iron, from the looks of it."
"Lines of green and blue slice and swirl across it. So it must have some fresh water. I wouldn't be surprised if there was more underground."
"There's no clear signs of the ark, but the ship is reading intense bursts of energy from underground."
"If they're here, they might have chosen to live underground - perhaps to access water, or to stay safe from the sun."
"In any case, I need to land to recharge the energy core. And I should eat something."
"I locate the region with the strongest signatures: a mountainous area near the planet's north pole."
"I put in the coordinates and carefully steer the ship towards the atmosphere."
"The oranges and reds become even more brilliant as I descend. The mountains look like marble - they're almost psychedelic."
"There's a small strip of flat land ahead. I slow the ship, bring it about, and make my landing."

scene bg mountains
with Dissolve(2.0)

"I push open the hatch and climb out, once I'm sure I'm fully innoculated."
"The sun beats down on me. I can feel myself sweating already. The air smells metallic and faintly of mud."
"I'd want to live underground too, if I landed here."
"I decide to find some shade before anything else."
"The sun is already disorienting me, making me dizzy and dehydrated... this could be bad."
"But there are no trees to be found."
"I wander a ways away from the shuttle, looking for a valley or a river or something -"
"But there's nothing. Just more mountains."
"I squint and try to see something, anything through the piercing sunlight."
"What I see are holes."
"They look tiny in the distance, but as I examine the hills nearby I can see larger ones."
"Now that I see them up close, they don't look like holes anymore."
"They're burrows."
"The thought of fresh water and shade emboldens me, and I frantically search for the nearest one."
"I see one just a few feet away on the next hill. I run for it."
"These burrows are huge. This one must be at least six feet in diameter!"
"I step forward towards it. I bet it leads to an underground river..."
"Maybe Penelope's there. Splashing around, playing in the water. Learning to enjoy warm weather for once."
"I hear splashing inside, too."
"I climb down inside the burrow and follow the sound."

scene bg cave
with Dissolve(2.0)

"The splashing stops."
t "Penelope?"
"I get to the water source. It's a tiny underground lake. Light from outside reflects off of the surface and paints patterns on the ceiling."
"Penelope's in the water."
t "Penelope!"
"She turns to look at me..."
"And she's not Penelope."

show son neutral

"The creature is as surprised to see me as I am to see it."
"It lets out a shrill scream."
"The sound is high-pitched and grating. My hands rush to my ears to shield them."
"I step backwards and trip over my feet."
"When I look up again there's another creature at the entrance of the cave. This one is larger."
"It enters the cave and scuttles towards me. Its legs are covered by a long skirt, but I can see at least eight of them."
"It strides past me and picks up the smaller one, placing it down by its feet."

show dad angry behind son

u "We've claimed this cave for our own. Whatever you are, you're not welcome here."
"Somehow, my translator manages to parse out what sound like whistles and trills into something I can understand."
t "I don't mean to claim it. I'm sorry."
t "I was just looking for refuge from the shade."
u "Are you a surfacer? Is that what you look like?"
u "You don't look like you'd survive out there."
t "Yes - I mean, no, I wouldn't, not for long. I'm not a surfacer. I'm a traveller."
t "I'm from space."
t "I've come looking for my people. I was separated from them... I just want to know if they're here."
u "They're not."
t "...Alright. I'm sorry for inconveniencing you."
"I look at the smaller one again."
t "Is that your child?"
t "My child is with the others of my people."
t "I'm looking for her too."
t "Are you its mother?"
show dad neutral
d "...I'm her father. Her mother is gone."
t "I'm sorry."
"Another shrill sound echoes from further inside the cave."

hide dad

"The father scuttles off into the dark, leaving me with the child."
"I look around the cave."
"What I can see of it is sparse. A pile of what looks like food lies in a corner, but there's no refrigeration."
"A scant few scraps of cloth are neatly folded in another corner."
"Outside, the sun is so bright that I have to squint when I look out the entrance of the cave."
t "Do you really live here? Your whole family?"
b "..."
"The child stares blankly at me."
"The silence between us is palpably awkward."
"Unable to find the words to cut through the tension, I walk to the mouth of the cave and crouch."
"Gingerly, I reach out into the sun and lower my fingers to the ground."
"The sand is white hot, like a stove. I recoil in pain."
"I examine my fingers. They seem unburnt."
"When I turn back to the cave, hoping to soothe my hand in the lake, the child has joined me at the cave's entrance."
"She's still giving me that blank stare... but then, her eyes still firmly on me, she lifts one of her hands up and places it in mine."
"It's cool, smooth and tough to the touch, like a soft exoskeleton. It has no wrinkles or imperfections - only tiny pores that look like they might secrete some sort of fluid."
"I'm surprised at how human it looks. And it's so small."
"The palm of the hand, though, is dappled with a deep orange, the pores swollen and bumpy. I'm completely unfamiliar with her physiology, but even I can tell that it's badly burned."
"It must be so painful."
t "Can I treat it? I have some first-aid supplies in my ship. Or I could bandage it..."
"She slips her hand out of mine, gathers up her skirts and lifts them to reveal her legs: at least a dozen of them, their tiny, clawed feet clutching the sand under us."
"It's hard to see in this light - and she only lifts her skirts up a little - but I can see from here the same deep orange bruises, the same swelling, and the sheen of some kind of fluid around the worst parts of it. Pus? It could be something else, of course, but..."
"She fidgets with the feet that are the most badly burned, lifting them up one by one to get a moment away from the sun. One of the feet is almost brown."
t "You're sensitive to the heat."
t "And yet you still go out..."

show dad neutral behind boy

d "There's so little food here that we have to go out most days to forage."
t "Couldn't you go out at night?"
d "We could... but so do most of the surfacers that roam the mountains."
d "We fare much better against the sun."
t "How long have you been living out here?"
d "Since we came up, it's been..."
b "Twenty days."
d "...Yes. This is our twenty-first."
"I notice for the first time another creature behind the father. It's much smaller than its sister. Its head is so big that it looks like it should fall over from the weight of it."
"It's cowering behind a rock right now, staring at me with the same big eyes as its father and sister."
t "Where were you before?"
d "Below."
t "And are you alone here? Or..."
d "The others are still below. We came up alone."
t "So what happened?"

show dad sad

"He looks away. It's clear he doesn't want to answer."
"I wonder what I would say if he asked me why I left Earth..."
"I decide not to press the subject."
"Instead, I look at the child next to him. She's still watching me, her eyes intent and unblinking... and somehow purposeful."
"What I thought before was a blank stare is all of a sudden bursting with emotion. But not just that -"
"In her eyes I see her memories. I remember them too. They come to me as easily as memories of Earth."
"I see a vast underground city, the walls glowing with some sort of luminescent rock."
"I see thousands of their people working in unison. Memories, emotions, orders, ideas... they move between them like glances in a crowded room. In the dark, children dream the same dreams."
if calypso1:
   "It's unsettling... but somehow powerful."
if calypso2:
   "It's incredible... but somehow unsettling."
"I remember mother's nervousness, father's confusion. I remember thousands of glances conveying shame, and it becomes like a weight, heavier and heavier until I can't bear it."
"There's no trial. There's no due process. I don't even know the crime. This system shouldn't be familiar to me. How do I know it so well?"
"The family packs their things. The children leave the dream in the middle, leave the others to sleep as we climb through crevices and cracks in the caverns."
"The shame fades as we near the surface... but so does the dream. Now we sleep alone, my little brother and I. Two against the terrible force of our unconscious minds."
"We emerge from the cave and fall into the sand... and my flesh cooks inside my skin."
"Nothing has ever hurt so badly or shone so brightly."

"I close my eyes."
"I think of Penelope, of the Ark, of our home on Earth. Of coriander and flower beds and damp soil between my fingers."
"I'm me again..."
"But that child's memories have settled into my head. The contradiction should be making my head spin, but somehow it doesn't."
"I lift my head and look at the father."
t "Let me help you."

show dad concerned

"The words come out of my mouth before I can fully think them over."
"My ship won't be getting off the ground until tomorrow at least..."
"And the memory of those burns still hurts, even if my skin has never felt the pain."

d "We don't need your help."

show son angry

b "Yes we do."
"The father looks surprised to hear his daughter speak... but her eyes don't leave me. I look at her, but I keep finding myself looking away, worried she'll take me away into another memory."
b "I showed her."
b "She sees us now."

show dad angry

d "You did what--?"
t "It's alright. It's already done."
t "I understand--I mean, I remember."
menu room_menu:
   t "And I know what it's like..."
   "...to want to keep your family safe.":
      $ saferoom = True
      $ playroom = False
      jump saferoom_resolve
   "...to want a better future for your children.":
      $ saferoom = False
      $ playroom = True
      jump playroom_resolve

label saferoom_resolve:
t "The things I've done to keep my daughter from harm... the things I would do..."
t "I never would have thought I'd have the strength in me to do them."
t "But I found it in me when the time came. As you did."
t "You've been so strong for them... but you can't make this place safe without my help."
t "Be vulnerable for them now, and let me lend you my strength."
t "I promise I'll do everything I can to help you."
jump room_resolve

label playroom_resolve:
t "All I want is to make a future where my daughter can be happier than I was."
t "The things I'd do for that future... the things I have done... I never imagined I'd have the strength to do them."
t "But I found that strength in the end. As you did."
t "You've given up so much for that future..."
t "Let me shoulder some of that burden for you. Let me lend you my strength."
t "And I swear I'll do everything I can to help you."
jump room_resolve

label room_resolve:
show dad sad
d "...What can you do?"
"His directness catches me off-guard, almost as much as the complexity I now understand in his expression."
"He looks defeated... but also hopeful."
t "Whatever you need me to."

scene bg mountains
"Over the next several days, I spend the mornings and evenings - and as much of the midday sun as I can stand - scouring the hills for supplies and resources."
"I bring everything I can carry, from small stones and plants to the dried-out trunks of giant, smooth cacti - back to the cave. I bring the things I have trouble carrying, like small boulders, in stages, pushing them a little bit at a time before returning with other things to the cave for breaks."
"When we've gathered enough, we begin plans for construction."
"The family won't stand a chance of survival without a reliable food source, so we plan to build one. Hollowed out and cut in half lengthwise, the cactus trunks make for excellent plant pots, and the tube-like structures that line the insides work as a kind of natural water distribution system."
"We build a tube out of hollowed-out tree branches that travels from the mouth of the cave down to the plants, so that the plants can be watered without anyone needing to travel outside."
"The daughter teaches me how to forage for seeds one early morning before the sand heats up, and I use her technique to find them enough seeds for a decently-sized garden."
"Meanwhile, the family sharpens down the stones into sharp edges, which I use - along with ropes made from a long, spindly plant - to fashion rudimentary traps for any small animals enticed by the gardens. In the evenings and early mornings, the family can reset the traps and make breakfast from what they find inside."
"We fall into an almost unsettlingly easy workflow. It takes me some time to notice that this is more than just friendly rapport: the family is sharing memories, thoughts and ideas with me, inspiring me to take certain paths and look for the most crucial supplies."
"I'm not quite certain what connects our minds - pheromones, perhaps, or maybe electrical signals - but whatever it is, it doesn't allow me to communicate with them in the same way. I can only listen, and respond when I'm within earshot."
"This frustrates the children, but their father seems resigned to it. Eventually he opens up to me, asking me questions about my people, the Ark, and my home on Earth."
if saferoom:
   "I tell him about the military base where Penelope spent the first few years of her life. Our room had such tiny windows that I had to stand on the tips of my toes to see outside. Sometimes I'd lift Penelope up so she could look out, and she'd start crying when I put her down."
   "It was safe, of course, but it was no way to live. When I get back to the ark, I'll build her a house like a castle: safe but beautiful, and beautiful in its safety."
   "I feel my heartbeat quicken. I need to get back to her."
   "He hears my heartbeat, too - I can see his expression change as the anxiety washes over me."
   "He gives me a wistful, sympathetic look, and my mind fills with pictures of his children, happy and playing. I feel his happiness, his strength, his pride for them. It's all he can do to help."
   "But in the absence of those feelings in me
"As I answer, I can feel him remembering his past life: his extended family underground, his partner, the glow of the cave walls. He remembers it in synchrony with my stories, and I am reminded of his memories."
if saferoom:
   "This vulnerability seems to put him at ease. I remember that he hasn't spoken to another adult since his partner died."